Initial development docs for the CSI Driver (#567)
awslabs/mountpoint-s3-csi-driver: dev/README.md

# Developing Mountpoint for Amazon S3 CSI Driver

This document and the `dev/` folder contains references, documentation, and various things for developing the CSI Driver. Note that this document is written with v2 in mind, most things should also apply to v1 but there might be slight differences.

## Background

The CSI Driver implements [Container Storage Interface (CSI)](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/v1.9.0/spec.md) to provide Amazon S3 Buckets as volumes for containers using [Mountpoint for Amazon S3](https://github.com/awslabs/mountpoint-s3) under the hood.
Mountpoint is based on Filesystem in Userspace (FUSE) and allows you to mount your buckets as local file systems.

Even though the CSI is a generic interface, Mountpoint for Amazon S3 CSI Driver actively only test against [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/).
All end-to-end tests of the CSI Driver creates [Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS)](https://aws.amazon.com/eks/) clusters,
installs the CSI Driver, and runs the test against the real EKS cluster.

### Kubernetes primer

Kubernetes is a container orchestration system with the following architecture:

> ![Kubernetes Architecture](https://kubernetes.io/images/docs/components-of-kubernetes.svg)

Reviewer: np: This and next diagram looks bad in dark mode 😅

<img width="1066" height="500" alt="Screenshot 2025-08-22 at 13 22 15" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/13883d02-aeaf-4441-b668-16f4efe21605" />

Author: Should be better now

```bash
$ pwd
~/mountpoint-s3-csi-driver

$ helm upgrade --install aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver \
    --namespace kube-system \
   ./charts/aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver
```

This would install the Helm chart with the default values. You can customise [default values](/charts/aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver/values.yaml) by using `--set`:
```bash
$ helm upgrade --install aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver \
    --namespace kube-system \
    --set controller.nodeSelector."kubernetes\.io/role"="control-plane" \
   ./charts/aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver
```

You can verify that the CSI Driver is installed by listing all Pods owned by the CSI Driver:
```bash
$ kubectl get pods -lapp.kubernetes.io/name=aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver -A
NAMESPACE     NAME                                 READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
kube-system   s3-csi-controller-6b4cbf9ddf-nm74l   1/1     Running   0          54s
kube-system   s3-csi-node-dfmhd                    3/3     Running   0          54s
```

You can uninstall the Helm chart by running:
```bash
$ helm uninstall -n kube-system aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver

> ```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could add a note here saying that this is unnecessary when using upgrade (since it overwrites the current).

=== RUN   TestGettingScheduledButNotYetReadyPod
--- PASS: TestGettingScheduledButNotYetReadyPod (0.11s)
=== RUN   TestGettingNotYetScheduledPod
--- PASS: TestGettingNotYetScheduledPod (0.13s)
=== RUN   TestGettingUnschedulablePod
--- PASS: TestGettingUnschedulablePod (0.12s)
=== RUN   TestGettingPodsConcurrently
--- PASS: TestGettingPodsConcurrently (0.11s)
PASS
ok      command-line-arguments  1.159s
```

#### Controller tests

The [controller component](/docs/ARCHITECTURE.md#the-controller-component-aws-s3-csi-controller) of the CSI Driver
is mainly responsible for managing Mountpoint Pods by communicating with the Kubernetes control plane.

The CSI Driver uses [envtest](https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/pkg/envtest) to setup a local Kubernetes control plane and run test against it.

These controller tests can be found in `/tests/controller` folder, and can be run by:

```bash
$ pwd
~/mountpoint-s3-csi-driver

$ make test
...
Ran 55 of 55 Specs in 159.773 seconds
SUCCESS! -- 55 Passed | 0 Failed | 0 Pending | 0 Skipped
--- PASS: TestControllers (159.77s)
PASS
ok      github.com/awslabs/mountpoint-s3-csi-driver/tests/controller    160.335s

> ```

Reviewer 2: I remember you saying these might be incorrect so leaving this comment as a reminder

These tests by default downloads and runs against 1.33 version of Kubernetes control plane, and in [the CI they run against our whole version matrix](/.github/workflows/controller-tests.yaml).

See [Writing controller tests](https://book.kubebuilder.io/cronjob-tutorial/writing-tests) and
[Configuring envtest for integration tests](https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/envtest) for more details on controller tests.

#### End-to-end tests

> The CSI Driver has a end-to-end test suite as well. These tests run against real Kubernetes clusters with [a various Kubernetes version and host matrix in the CI](/.github/matrix.yaml) for each PR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CSI Driver has an end-to-end test suite as well. These tests run against real Kubernetes clusters with [a matrix in the CI of various Kubernetes versions and hosts](/.github/matrix.yaml) for each PR.
```
